IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. PAMI-5, NO. 2, MARCH 1983 

179 

LALIT R. BAHL, MEMBER, IEEE, FREDERICK JELINEK, FELLOW, IEEE, AND ROBERT L. MERCER 

Abstract—Speech recognition is formulated as a problem of maximum ; CO7F likelihood decoding. This formulation requires statistical models of the _ | | ‘ a speech | TEXT SPEAKER **|** ACOUSTIC LINGUISTIC tistical productionmodels for process.use in speechIn thisrecognition. paper, we describe aWe give special number attention of sta| GENERATOR | —__PROCESSOR DECODER || to determining the parameters for such models from sparse data. We SPEECH RECOGNIZER also describe two decoding methods, one appropriate for constrained Fig. 1. A continuous speech recognition system. artificial languages and one appropriate for more realistic decoding tasks. To illustrate the usefulness of the methods described, we review a number of decoding results that have been obtained with them. _ ae) Index ° sext w acoustic |1_Y .| Linouistic |_& mation, speechTerms—Markovrecognition, models,statisticalmaximummodels.likelihood, parameter esti| GENERATOR |neSPEAKERACOUSTIC CHANNELPROCESSOR | || DECODER Fig. 2. The communication theory view of speech recognition. I. INTRODUCTION | HE AIM of research in automatic speech recognition is In addition to the constraint imposed by the task domain, automatically.the development of a device that transcribes natural speech ine exPerimental anvrorment 1Ban eeicted jed sever be Three areas of speech recognition research can a ways. i othe e, at ™” SPoY 18 ‘ale efee he distinguished: 1) isolated word recognition where words are i set mucrop nn me sysae tuned’ toa ln ta ou ° separated by distinct pauses; 2) continuous speech recognition talker 1s prompte ya script, false starts are € iminate » etc.; where sentences are produced continuously in a natural manrecognition often requires many seconds of CPU time for each ner; and 3) speech understanding where the aim is not transecond of spew. . f . scription but understanding in the sense that the system (e.g., The basic CSR system consists or an oe Pre a robot or a database query system) responds correctly to a (AP) followed bya linguistic decoder (LD) as shown In F'lg. 1. spoken instruction or request. Commercially available prodTraditionally, the acoustic processor is designed to act as a ucts exist for isolated word recognition with vocabularies of | Phonetician, transcribing the speech waveform into a string of up to several hundred words. phonetic symbols, while the linguistic decoder translates the Although this article is confined to continuous speech recogPossibly garbled phonetic string into a string of words. In nition (CSR), the statistical methods described are applicable ™ore recent work [1]-[6], the acoustic processor does not to the other two areas of research as well. Acoustics, phonetProduce a phonetic transcription, but rather produces a string ics, and signal processing are discussed here only as required to Of labels each of which characterizes the speech waveform lo_ provide background for the exposition of statistical methods cally over a short time interval (see Section II). used in the research carried out at IBM. In Fig. 2, speech recognitionis formulated as a problem in Products which recognize continuously spoken small vocabuCO™munication theory. The speaker and acoustic processor laries are already on the market but the goal of unrestricted 4" combined into an acoustic channel, the speaker transformcontinuous speech recognition is far from being realized. All ing the text into a speech waveform and the acoustic processor current research is carried out relative to task domains which 4cting as a data transducer and compressor. The channel progreatly restrict the sentences that can be uttered. These task Vides the linguistic decoder with a noisy string from which it domains are of two kinds: those where the allowed sentences Must recover the message—in this case the original text. One is are prescribed @ priori by a grammar designed by the experifree to modify the channel by adjusting the acoustic processor menter (referred to as artificial tasks), and those related to a__ but unlike in communications, one cannot choose the code belimited area of natural discourse which the experimenter tries Cause it is fixed by the language being spoken. It is possible to to model from observed data (referred to as natural tasks). allow feedback from the decoder to the acoustic processor but Examples of natural tasks are the text of business letters, the mathematical consequences of such a step are not well patent applications, book reviews, etc. understood. By not including feedback we facilitate a consistent and streamlined formulation of the linguistic decoding M . . . problem. Thevathorst aereceived withFebthe IBM23, TJ.1981;WatsonrevisedResearchSeptember¢Center,28, York- 1982. The rest of this. article: isrerdivided as follows. Section: II gives: town Heights, NY 10598. a brief summary of acoustic processing techniques. Section 

0162-8828/83/0300-0179$01.00 © 1983 IEEE 

180 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. PAML-5, NO. 2, MARCH 1983 III formulates the problem of linguistic decoding and shows mize the probability of error, w must be chosen so that the necessity of statistical modeling of the text and of the AL oy acoustic channel. Section IV introduces Markov models of Poly)= max Powly). GD) speech processes. Section V describes an elegant linguistic ; decoder based on dynamic programming that is practical under BY Bayes’ rule certain conditions. Section VI deals with the practical aspects P(w) P(y|w) of the sentence hypothesis search conducted by the linguistic P(w|y) = ~ Py) (3.2) decoder. Sections VII and VIII introduce algorithms for exy tracting model parameter values automatically from data. SecSince P(y) does not depend on w, maximizing P(w| y) is equivtion IX discusses methods of assessing the performance of CSR alent to maximizing the likelihood P(w, y) =P(w) P(y|w). systems, and the relative difficulty of recognition tasks. FiHere P(w) is the a priori probability that the word sequence w nally, in Section X we illustrate the capabilities of current recwill be produced by the text generator, and P(y|w) is the ognition systems by describing the results of certain recogniprobability with which the acoustic channel (see Fig. 1) transtion experiments. forms the word string w into the AP output stringy. To estimate P(w), the LD requires a probabilistic model of II. AcousTIC PROCESSORS _ the text generator, which we refer to as the language model. An acoustic processor (AP) acts as a data compressor of the For most artificial tasks, the language modeling problem is speech waveform. The output of the AP should 1) preserve quite simple. Often the language is specified by a small finitethe information important to recognition and 2) be amenable State or context-free grammar to which probabilities can be to statistical characterization. If the AP output can be easily °@Sily attached. For example, the Raleigh language (see Secinterpreted by people, it is possible to judge the extent to "on IV) is specified by Fig. 7 where all words possible at any which the AP fulfills requirement 1). point are considered equally likely. Typically, an AP is a signal processor, which transforms the For natural tasks the estimation of P(w) is much more diffispeech waveform into a string of parameter vectors, followed ult. Linguistics has not progressed to the point that it can by a pattern classifier, which transforms the string of parameProvide a grammar for a sizable subset of natural English, ter vectors into a string of[labels][ from][a][finite][alphabet.][If][ the] Which is useful for speech recognition. In addition, the interpattern classifier is absent, then the AP produces an unlabeled est in linguistics has been in specifying the sentences of a lanstring of parameter vectors. Ina segmenting AP, the speech 8U28e; but not their probabilities. Our approach has been to waveform is segmented into distinct phonetic events (usually ™odel the text generator as a Markov source, the parameters phones!) and each of these varying length portions is then °f Which are estimated from a large sample of text. labeled. To estimate P(y|w), the other component of the likelihood, A time-synchronous AP produces parameter vectors comthe LD requires a probabilistic model of the acoustic chanputed from successive fixed-length intervals of the speech nel, which must account for the speaker’s phonological and waveform. The distance from the parameter vector to each of | acoustic-phonetic variations and for the performance of the a finite set of standard parameter vectors, or prototypes, is acoustic processor. Once models are available for computing computed. The label for the parameter vector is the name of P(w) and P(y|w), it is in principle possible for the LD to comthe prototype to which it is closest. pute the likelihood of each sentence in the language and deterIn early acoustic processors, prototypes were obtained from Mine the most likely w directly. However, even a small artifispeech data labeled by an expert phonetician. In more recent ial language such as the Raleigh language has several million acoustic processors, prototypes are obtained automatically Possible sentences. It is therefore necessary in practice to from unlabeled speech data [3], [4]. carry out a suboptimal search. A dynamic programming A typical example of a time-synchronous AP is the IBM Search algorithm, the applicability of which is limited to tasks centisecond acoustic processor (CSAP). The acoustic paramOf moderate complexity, is described in Section V. A more eters used by CSAP are the energies in each of 80 frequency general tree search decoding algorithm is described in Secbands in steps of 100 Hz covering the range from 0-8000 Hz. tion VI. They are computed once every centisecond using a 2 cs winIV. Markov SourcE MODELING OF OwrouspeakerThetois obtainedthepatternphones classifromof severalEnglish.has 45samplesprototypesEach ofprototype hiscorrespondspeechfor awhichg **i** venng Notation. and Terminology. SPEECH PROCESSES has been carefully labeled by a phonetician. By a Markov source, we mean a collection of states connected to one another by transitions which produce symbols HI. Lincurstic DECODER from a finite alphabet. Each transition ¢ from a state s has The AP produces an output stringy. From this stringy, the associated with it a probability ¢,(t) which is the probability linguistic decoder (LD) makes an estimate W of the word — that ¢ will be chosen next whens is reached. From the states string w produced by the text generator (see Fig. 1). To miniof a Markov source we choose one state as the initial state and one state as the final state. The Markov source then assigns 1For an introductory discussion of phonetics, see Lyons |7, pp. Probabilities to all strings of transitions from the initial state 99-132]. to the final state. Fig. 3 shows an example of a Markov source. 

BAHL et al.: CONTINUOUS SPEECH RECOGNITION 181 O oe Ss () | $— ) CA Q a7 C 8 5 C8 2 fe) | | CO) @ Fig. 3. A Markov source. C) We define a Markov source more formally as follows. Let$ Fig. 4. A Markov source with null transitions be a finite set of states, J a finite set of transitions, and @ a finite alphabet. Two elements of §, s; and sy are distinguished as initial and final states, respectively. The structure of a Marbob kov source is a 1-1 mapping M: J>SX@X 58. If M(H)= Markov |e peor (I, a, r) then we refer to / as the predecessor state of f, a as the SOURCE thks output symbol associated with ¢, and 7 as the successor state of t; we write / = L(t), a = A(f), and r= R(?). The parameters of a Markov source are probabilities q,(s), s€§- {sp}, t€ J, such that Fig. 5. A filtered Markov source. qt)=0 if s#L(4) b, ¢ é bp ¢ bs > s(t) =1, s€8- {sp}. (4.1) Fig. 6. A sequence of transitions to illustrate spanning. b, spans t1; t by spans tz, t3, tq; and b3 spans ts, tg. In general, the transition probabilities associated with one state are different from those associated with another. HowIn practice it is useful to allow transitions which produce no ever, this need not always be the case. We say that states, is output. These null transitions are represented diagrammatitied to state s2 if there exists a 1-1 correspondence T;,,,: J> cally by interrupted lines (see Fig. 4). Rathet than deal with J such that qs, (¢)=45,(Ts,5,(0)) for all transitions ¢. It is null transitions directly, we have found it convenient to assoeasily verified that the relationship of being tied is an equivaciate with them the distinguished latter ¢. We then add to the lence relation and hence induces a partition of § into sets of Markov source a filter (see Fig. 5) which removes ¢; transformstates which are mutually tied. ing the output sequence a? into an observed sequence bj’, A string of n transitions ?¢7 for which L(t,) = s; is called a where b; €8 = @- {¢}. Although more general sources can path; if R(t,) = sr, then we refer to it asa complete path. The be handled, we shall restrict our attention to sources which do probability of a path rt? is given by not have closed circuits of null transitions. P(t?) = ds,(t1) IIh 9e(jt: (4.2) 51,mIf t?thenis wea pathsaywhichthat producesb; spans fjthe4 if tjobserved4is the transitionoutputeg: sequencewhich: i=2 produced 5; or if ¢; is a null transition immediately preceding a Associated. with. path r? is. an output symbol string. a] = A(t?). transitionon spannedSP byy b;.i ; Forr example,P in Fig.6 6, b, 1 spansSP A . : n : . t,; 52 spans t,,¢3, and t,; and b3 spans ts and fg. particular output string a], may in general arise from more : : Is f than one path. Thus, the probability P(a’) is given by A major advantage of using Markov source models for the , , 1 text generator and acoustic channel is that once the structure P@l)= >> P(t?) 8(A(t?), a7) (4.3) is specified, the parameters can be estimated automatically 17 from data (see Sections VII and VIII). Furthermore, compuh tationally efficient algorithms exist for computing P(w) and where P(y|w) with such models (see Sections V and VI). Markov 1 if a=b source models also allow easy estimation of the relative diffi5(a, b) = . (4.4) culty of recognition tasks (see Section IX). 0 otherwise. A Markov source for which each output string a” determines a 7% Language Model unique path is called a unifilar Markov source. Since the language model has to assign probabilities to strings of words, it is natural for its output alphabet to be the 2¢” is a short-hand notation for the concatenation of the symbols VOcabulary of the language. However, the output alphabet can t1,t2,°°*,¢,. Strings are indicated in boldface throughout. include shorter units such as word stems, prefixes, suffixes, 

182 

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. PAML-5, NO. 2, MARCH 1983 

**==> picture [519 x 669] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
wanted changes radio<br>ntle | duration ies ses weapon _. issues<br>,/ Broce ] Condition —e thingre”* segineere<br>Bute Sergeant | ieee? captain trom blons<br>/ Uiaticent ver to pears goshtry nae _4 ion \<br>[one] ' Taster 1 rr nes officer ‘against ‘airplone<br>large eriod opple works into machine<br>oe =“ oe i : me \<br>Oger + practices leon : ~) 13) over’? Cire eC) ite se<br>ete treotes + fave” -—————-— finaly wn socrifice<br>y 1/ feidse[aceword 7|, actionseae 8proces ia fattencuatly betweenamong telds,interests<br>| Beetess ; t + . techniques<br>Fig. 7. Grammar of the Raleigh language.<br>etc., from which word sequences can be derived. Fig. 7 is the<br>model of the artificial Raleigh language which has been used in<br>some of our experiments. The output alphabet is the 250-<br>word vocabulary of the language. For diagrammatic conve- 7 a<br>nience, sets of transitions between pairs of states have been re-<br>placed by single transitions with an associated list of possible Fi<br>output words. ig. 8. A word-based Markov subsource.<br>For natural languages, the structure of the model is not given . ; ; . . ;<br>a priori. However, articulation, talker’s position relative to the microphone, am-<br>P(wi) = P(w1)P(w2|w1)P(w3|wi)2  oP(w,|win-4 ) bientWe  noise,will only etc.consider the problem of modeling the acoustic<br>h channel for single words. Models for word strings can be con-<br>= T] Pon | wi “ty (4.5) structed by concatenation of these simpler, single word. mod-<br>kat els. Fig. 8 is an example of the structure of a Markov source<br>and so it is natural to consider structures for which a word for asingle vr ts double ares aera sere Ok transitions.<br>string wk-1 uniquely determines the state of the model. A nn or eae. ra on ne outpof ab a i © straight: the<br>particularly simple model is the N-gram model where the a inns aby SPnena “hone, rine i whe e<br>wordsstate at time k- 1 corresponds to the N-1 most recent ‘4%! hop adove ‘ti ; 5 can ee en and shortenf e an<br>We_N41.°'*,Wx-1. This is equivalent to using the UNCiation, respectively. Since t e pronunciation of a wor<br>approximation depends on the environment in which it occurs, it may be nec-<br>essary in practice to make the parameters of the model depend<br>n<br>Piw")(wi) = P k-1 on the phonetic environment provided by the preceding and<br> = i (we| Wie=v +1)- following words.<br>Since the same sounds can occur in many different words,<br>N-gram models are computationally practical only for small portions of one model will be similar to portions of many<br>values of N. In order to reflect longer term memory, the state other models. The number of parameters required to specify<br>can be made dependent on a syntactic analysis of the entire all the word models can be reduced by modeling sounds or<br>past word string wk-! as might be obtained from an appro- phones rather than words directly. This leads to a two-level<br>priate grammar of the language. model in which word strings are transformed into phone<br>The strings which are then transformed into AP output strings. Us-<br> Acoustic Channel Model ing this approach, the acoustic channel model is built up from<br>The AP is deterministic and hence the same waveform will two components: a set of phonetic subsources, one for each<br>always give rise to the same AP output string. However, fora word; and a set of acoustic subsources, one for each phone.<br>given word sequence, the speaker can produce a great variety Let # be the alphabet of phones under consideration. A<br>of waveforms resulting in a corresponding variation in the AP phonetic subsource for a word is a Markov source with output<br>output string. Some of the variation arises because there are alphabet P which specifies the pronunciations possible for the<br>many different ways to pronounce the same word (this is word and assigns a probability to each of them. Fig. 9 shows<br>called phonological variation). Other factors include rate of the structure of a phonetic Markov subsource for the word<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


BAHL et al.: CONTINUOUS SPEECH RECOGNITION 

183 

h u AP string y{’, the complete path tf? which maximizes the probability P(r?) subject to the constraint Y(t?) =y{". A det coder based on this strategy would then produce as its output ed W(t?). This decoding strategy is not optimal since it may not ? 7 ¥ maximize the likelihood P(w, y). In fact, for a given pair w, y Fig.9. A phonetic Markov subsource. there are many complete paths ¢ for which W(f)=w and Y()=y. To minimize the probability of error, one must sum P(#) over all these paths and select the w for which the sum is maximum. Nevertheless, good recognition results have been obtained using this suboptimal decoding strategy [1], [2], [9]. OnnaCm Onnene --- OS =OS =D A simple method for finding the most likely path is a dySS ae namic programming scheme [10] called the Viterbi Algorithm Fig. 10. An acoustic Markov subsource. [11]. Let 7,(s) be the most probable path to state s which produces output yt. Let V;,(s) = P(r;,(s)) denote the probabilACOUSTIC ACOUSTIC ity of the path 7;(s). We wish to determine 7,,(s7).*> Because a al5 _ Of the Markov nature of the process, 7;(s) can be shown to be yet \ / u — an extension of 7;,_,(s’) for some s’. Therefore, 7,(s) and [ AoousTic H \ / — V;,(s) can be computed recursively from 7; _,(s) and Vx_,(s)[1][and][7,(s;)] ode OF PHONE © er | starting with the boundary conditions V9(s;)[=] ' \ acoustic ACOUSTIC / being the null string. Let C(s, a)= {t|RO=s, A(t)= a}. OF PHONE OF PHONE Fig. 11. A phone-based Markov source based= on the phonetic subsource: Vi(s)=max tEC(s,{max YE) Vy_, LO) an, one? - tEC(s,¢)max Ve(L(1)) ancy (O}(5.1) two. The structures of these subsources may be derived by the qf the maximizing transition t is in C(s, y;,) then 7,(s)= applicationfor of phonological rules to dictionary pronunciations Tz -1(L(t)) *t; otherwise t must be in C(s, $) and 7;(s)= the words [8]. Tx(L(t)) °t, where ° denotes concatenation. Note that in (5.1) An acoustic subsource for a phone is a Markov source with V;(s) depends on V;,(L(t)) for t€C(s, $). V,(L(t)) must output alphabet ¥ which specifies the possible AP output therefore be computed before V;,(s). Because closed circuits strings for that phone and assigns a probability to each of of null loops are not allowed,’ it is possible to order the states them. Fig. 10 shows the structure of an acoustic Markov sub5, 5) 5, +--+ such that t EC(s,, $) and L(t) = s; only ifj< source used with the IBM Centisecond Acoustic Processor. k. If we then compute V;(s;), Vi(s2), etc., in sequence, the By replacing each of the transitions in the phonetic subpecessary values will always be available when required. source by the acoustic subsource for the corresponding phone, Many shortcuts to reduce the amount of computation and we obtain a Markov source model for the acoustic channel. storage are possible and we will briefly mention some of the This embedding process is illustrated in Fig. 11. more useful ones. If logarithms of probabilities are used, no Whereas the structure of the phonetic subsources can be demultiplications are necessary and the entire search can be carrived in a principled way from phonological rules, the structied out with additions and comparisons only. Computation tures of the word model in Fig. 8 and the phone model in Fig. ang storage needs can be reduced by saving for each k, only 9 are fairly arbitrary. Many possible structures seem reasonthose states having relatively large values of V;,(s). This can be able; the ones shown here are very simple ones which have achieved by first computing V,(max) = max, V;(s) and then been used successfully in recognition experiments. eliminating all states s having V;(s)< AV; (max) where A is V. VITERBI LINGUISTIC DECODING an appropriately. . chosen: threshold.was This makes the seaa **r** ch suboptimal, but in practice there is little or no degradation in perIn the preceding section we have shown that acoustic subformance if the threshold A is chosen with care. sources can be embedded in phonetic subsources to produce a This type of search can be used quite successfully on artifimodel for the acoustic channel. In a similar fashion we can cial tasks such as the Raleigh language task, where the number embed acoustic channel word models in the Markov source of states is of the order of 10°. specifying the language model by replacing each transition by In addition to its application to suboptimal decoding, the the model of the corresponding word. The resulting Markov Viterbi algorithm can be used to align an AP output string y source is a model for the entire stochastic process to the left with a known word string w, by determining the most likely of the linguistic decoder in Fig. 1. Each complete path t? path t which produces y when w is uttered. The path ¢ specithrough the model determines a unique word sequence wf = _ fies a sequence of phones which the algorithm puts into correW(t?) and a unique AP output string y7’ = Y(t{’) and has the spondence with the symbols forming the sequence y. Inspecassociated probability P(t). Using well known minimum-cost path-finding algorithms, it is possible to determine for a given 3See Section IV, Notation and Terminology. 

184 

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. PAMI-5, NO. 2, MARCH 1983 

tion of this alignment allows the experimenter to judge the to control the average rate of growth of A(w) along the most adequacy of his models and provides an intuitive check on the _ likely path. In practice, a can be chosen by trial and error. performance of the AP. An accurate estimate of Ly’ Pw’, 7, |w, y’) is, of course, VI. impossible in practice, but we can approximate it by ignoring Stack LinGuisTic DECODING the dependence on w. An estimate of E(y?,,|y/), the average In the previous section we presented a decoding procedure value of P(w’, y?’,, | yi), can be obtained from training data. which finds the most likely complete path ¢ for a given AP In practice, a Markov-type approximation of the form output string y. This decoding method is computationally h feasible only if the state space is fairly small, as is the case in E(y?. | yi)= Il E(y;| yf -k) (6.3) most artificial tasks. However, in the Laser task (described in jzi+i Section X), the number of states is of the order of 10'! which can be used. Using k = 1 is usually adequate. makes the Viterbi search unattractive. Furthermore, the ProThe likelihood used for incomplete paths during the search cedure is suboptimal because the word string corresponding to. : . ; : the most likely path ¢ may not be the most likely word string. is then given by In this section we present a graph-search decoding method n ; -; ; which attempts to find the most likely word string. This A(w)= P(w) > P(yi|w) "ECyi |i): (6.4) , =e method can be used with large state spaces. Search methods which attempt to find optimal pathsthrough For complete paths, the likelihood is graphs have been used extensively in information theory [12] _ n and in artificial intelligence [13]. Since we are interested in A(w) = Pw)PCV |), (6.5) finding the most likely word string, the appropriate graph to i.e., the probability that w was uttered and produced the comsearch is the word graph generated by the language model. plete output string y7. When a complete search of the language model graph is comThe likelihood of a successor path wt =w*-!w, can be putationally impractical, some heuristic must be used for recomputed incrementally from the likelihood of its immediate ducing the computation. Here we describe one specific heurispredecessor w¥~1. The a priori probability P(wk ) is easily obtic method that has been used successfully. To reduce the tained from the language model using the recursion amount of computation, a left-to-right search starting at the _ _ _ initial state and exploring successively longer paths can be carP(wt) = Powh 1) Powe [wi ‘). (6.6) ried out. To carry out this kind of search we need to define a_ The acoustic match values P(y4|w) can be computed increlikelihoodpaths of varyingfunctionlength.whichAnallowsobviousus tochoicecomparemay incompleteseem to be mentallyA searchif thebased valueson P(y{|w{this likelihood—') havefunction been savedis easily[14].implethe probability of uttering the (incomplete) sequence w and mented by having a stack in which entries of the form (w, producing some initial subsequence of the observed string y, A(w)) are stored. The stack, ordered by decreasing values of i€., A(w), initially contains a single entry corresponding to the initial state of the language model. The term stack as used here >h Pw, yi)=Pw) >h PCyi|w). (6.1) refers to an ordered list in which entries can be inserted at any i=0 i=0 position. At each iteration of the search, the top stack entry is ofThethefirstwordtermsequenceon the right-handw. The secondside is theterm, a priorireferred probabilityto as the oapath areined.evaluated;rit : anandjncompleteinserte intpath,© stac ine. oethe sions oftop patiheis . . . - a complete path, the search terminates with the path at the acoustic match,ae is the sumiover 7 of the probability: that w protopf the stack being the decoded path duces of the stack being the decoded path. an initial substring y; of the AP output string Y . UnforSince the search is not exhaustive, it is possible that the detunately, the value of @.1) will decrease with lengthening coded sentence is not the most likely one. A poorly articuword sequences ”, making it unsuitable for comparing incom‘jated word resulting in a poor acousti¢e match, or the occurplete paths of different lengths. Some form of normalization rence of a word with lowa priori probability can cause the to account for different path lengths 18 needed. As in the local likelihood of the most likely path to fall, which may then Fano metric used for sequential decoding [12] » it is advantaresult in the path being prematurely abandoned. In particular, geous to have a likelihood function which increases slowly short function words like the, a, and of, are often poorly aralong the most likely path, and decreases along other paths. ticulated, causing the likelihood to fall. At each iteration, all This can be accomplished bya likelihood function of the form paths having likelihood within a threshold A of the maximum A(w) n . . . likelihood path in the stack are extended. The probability of = > Pw, yi) ar" x PW, YP |w, yi). (6.2) prematurely abandoning the most likely path depends strongly If we consider‘=0 P(w, y;); to be the” cost associated with accountonSmallerthe choicevalues ofof AA willwhichdecreasecontrolsthe theamountwidthofofsearchthe search.at the ing for the initial part of the AP string y/ by the word string expense of having a higher probability of not finding the most w, then L’ P(w’, v7.4 |w, yi) represents the expected cost of likely path. In practice, A can be adjusted by trial and error to accounting for the remainder of the AP string y?,, with some give a satisfactory balance between recognition accuracy and continuation w’ of w. The normalizing factor «can be varied computation time. More complicated likelihood functions and 

BAHL et al.: CONTINUOUS SPEECH RECOGNITION 185 extension strategies have also been used but they are beyond where the scope of this paper. lt, 8,4) = 41((0) (RO, 8) (AC), 4). (7.5) VII. AUTOMATIC ESTIMATION OF MARKOV SOURCE As with the Viterbi algorithm described in Section V, the abPARAMETERS FROM DATA senceof null circuits guarantees that the states can be ordered Let P;(t, 67") be the joint probability that b7” is observed at SO that a;(s;) may be determined from a;-,(s), s€5, and the output of a filtered Markov source and that the ith output a(x), k <j. b; spans t. The probabilities B;(s) satisfy the equations The count Bm (Sr) = 1 (7.6a) c(t, b7")= >>m Pi(t, b1')/POT) (7.1) Bi(s) = >> BAR) és, 9) i=] t is the Bayes a posteriori estimate of the number of times that + >> Bi41(RM) &(t, 5,5) i<m,s# 5p (7.6b) the transition ¢ is used when the string 7’ is produced. If the t counts are normalized so that the total count for transitions _ from a given state is 1, then it is reasonable to expect that the where Bm +1(8) = 0 and resulting relative frequency E(t, 8,2) = qin) LO), 5) 5(A(), 2). (7.7) ft, bm) 2 c(t, bf") 6(s, L() (7.2) Step 3) of the iterative procedure above then consists of sent > c(t’, b7") &(s, L(t')) : computing a; in a forward pass over the data, 6; in a backward t’ pass over the data, and finally P(t, 67’) from (7.3). We refer will approach the transition probability q,(t) as m increases. to the iterative procedure together with the method described This suggests the following iterative procedure for obtaining for computing P,i(t, byP) as the Forward-Backward Algorithm. estimates of q,(t). The probability, P(b; ds of the observed sequence bj" is a 1) Make initial guesses q°(2). function of the probabilities q,(¢). To display this dependence 2) Set j=0. explicitly, we write P(b7’, q.(¢)). Baum [16] has proven that 3) Compute P;(t, 67") for all i and ¢ based on qi(t). POT, qs" ‘) > P61", a5(2)) with equality only if qs(t) is a 4) Compute f,(t, 6%”) and obtain new estimates q/*!(r)= Stationary point (extremum or inflexion point) of P(b7', -). f(t, 6%”). This result also holds if the transition distributions of some of 5) Setj=j+l. the states are known and hence held fixed or if some of the 6) Repeat from 3. states are tied* to one another thereby reducing the number of To apply this procedure, we need a simple method for comdependent transition distributions. puting P,(t, b%). Now P,(t, 6%) is just the probability that a When applied to a Markov source language model based on string of transitions ending in L(¢) will produce the observed V-8rams as described in Section IV the Forward-Backward sequence bi”, times the probability that ¢ will be taken once Algorithm reduces simply to counting the number of times L(t) is reached, times the probability that a string of transiK(w|wj’ ~*), that w follows the sequence wj’ ~", and setting tions starting with R(t) will produce the remainder of the obK(w| wh “1) served sequence. If A(t)=@, then the remainder of the obq_,v-1() = > Kw)" (7.8) served sequence is b}", if A(t)#@ then, of course, A(t) =; : wD 1 and the remainder of the observed sequence is b7,,. Thus if a;(s) denotes the probability of producing the observed seThis is equivalent to maximum likelihood estimation of the quence b4 by a sequence of transitions ending in the state s, _ transition probabilities. and B;(s) denotes the probability of producing the observed | When applied to a Markov source model for the acoustic sequence b?” bya string of transitions starting from the state channel, the Forward-Backward Algorithm is more interesting. s, then Let us first consider the word-based channel model indicated in Fig. 8. A known text wy’ is read by the speaker and proP,(t, , b™) = {a;-1L))-1L@)) ary)ary BisBRO)RO) ifif AWA()=% = dy. yi.cessed Theby theMarkovacousticsourceprocessorcorrespondingto produceto an outputthe text isstringcon(7.3) tionstructedthatfromstatestheof subsourcesthe source forwhichthe arisewordsfromwiththethesameassump-subThe probabilities a,(s) satisfy the equation [15] source state are tied. The Forward-Backward Algorithm then Go(s) is used to estimate the transition probabilities of the sub= 8(s, 57) + 2) ao(L(0)) VEE, 8, $) (7.48) sources from the output stringy”. To obtain reliable esti‘ mates of the subsource transition probabilities, it is necessary aj(s)= >> a-1L@) vs, 5) that each word in the vocabulary occur sufficiently often in t 4For definition of tying, see Section IV, Notation and Terminology. + > a,(L(t)) y(t,5,6) il (7.4b) For details of the Forward-Backward Algorithm extended to machines t with tied states, see [15]. 

186 

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. PAMI-5, NO. 2, MARCH 1983 

the text w?. For large vocabularies this may require an exor$, bitant amount of reading. Si The use of the phone-based model shown in Fig. 10 can s overcome this problem. The Markov source for the text is : ia constructed from phonetic and acoustic subsources as de5 5 B 4 scribed in Section IV. States in the source arising from the ~ same acoustic subsource state are assumed to be tied. In addiNS NS" tion, states from different phonetic subsources are assumed to XNQ be tied if transitions leaving the states result from the same ‘ A phonological rules. With these assumptions the training text S3 S3 can be considerably shorter since it need only include suffi(a) (b) ciently many instances of each phone and each phonetic rule. Fig. 12. (a) Part of transition structure of a Markov source. (b) The VIII. PARAMETER; ESTIMATION FROM corresponding part of an associated interpolated Markov source. It INSUFFICIENT Data ; The interpretation of (8.1) as an associated Markov source is often the case in practice that the data available are inimmediately suggests that the parameters \, be determined by sufficient for a reliable determination of all of the parameters the Forward-Backward (FB) Algorithm. However, since the of a Markov model. For example, the trigram model for the) parameters were introduced to predict as yet unseen data, Laser Patent Text corpus [18] used at IBM Research is based rather than to account for the training data bY’, the FB Algoon 1.5 million words. Trigrams which do not occur among rithm must be modified. We wish to extract the ) values from these 1.5 million words are assigned zero probability by maxidata that was not used to determine the distributions q,(t) and mum likelihood estimation, a degenerate case of the Forward- — *g.(z) [see (8.1)]. Since presumably we have only 57’ at our Backward Algorithm. Even though each of these trigrams is disposal, we will proceed by the deleted interpolation method. very improbable, there are so many of them that they constiWe shall divide 6” into n blocks and for i= 1,---,n estimate tute 23 percent of the trigrams present in new samples of text. from the ith block while using q,(t) and *q,(d) estimates deIn other words, after looking at 1.5 million trigrams the prob_siyed from the remaining blocks. ability that the next one seen will never have been seen before Since the A, values should depend on the reliability of the is roughly 0.23. The Forward-Backward Algorithm provides estimate q,(¢), it is natural to associate them with the estian adequate probabilistic characterization of the training data ated relative frequency of occurrence of the state s. We thus but the characterization may be poor for new data. Amethod gecide on & relative frequency ranges and aim to determine for handling this problem, presented in detail in [15], is discorresponding values A(1),:--,A(K). Then =A) if the cussed in this section. ; Consider relative frequency of s was estimated to fall within the ith : a Markov source model the parameters of which are range. to be estimated from data bj”. We assume that by"ms;is insuffiWe partition the state space § into subsets of tied states S¥, cient for the reliable estimation of all of the parameters. S¥,--+,S* and determine the transition correspondence Let q,(t) be forward-backward estimates of the transition functions T, ,' for all pairs of tied states s, s’. We recall from probabilities based on by" and let *q,(t) be the corresponding section IV that then *q,(t) = *q,y’(T,, (0) for all pairs s,s’ € estimates obtained when certain of the states are assumed to §,,i=1,-:-,r. If LE §,, then F(t) = {t'| t= Tr1),s'(2) be : : A : ? > as i 1), liketied. Where the estimates q,(¢) are unreliable, we would 5’ € §*} is the set of transitions that are tied to t. Since whereto fall back to the more reliably estimated *g,(f), but Tr1),10)= t, then t € S(t). q,(f) is reliable we would like to use it directly. We divide the data b”" into n blocks of length /(m = nl). We A convenient way to achieve this is to choose as final estijun the FB Algorithm in the ordinary way, but on the last mates of q,(t) a linear combination of q,(¢) and *q,(t). Thus iteration we establish separate counters we let q,(t) be given by ~ nw n . =)! m Fs(t)= Asqs(t)+ (1 - As) *95() (8.1) — ¢f(t, BT) DO Pit, b7)+ Do Pilt, dT) A [= j=jl with , chosen close to 1 when q,(¢) is reliable and close to = aie Fig. 12(a) shows the part of the transition structure of the fy each deleted block of data. The above values will give rise Markov source related to the state s. Equation (8.1) can be in49 getailed distributions terpreted in terms of the associated Markov source shown in Fig. 12(b), in which each state is replaced by three states. In (i) c(t, b7') 6(s, L(2) 33 Fig. 12(b), § corresponds directly to s in Fig. 12(a). The null 9st J > c(t’, by") 6(s, L(t’) (8.3) transitions from $ to s and s* have transition probabilities t’ equal to A, and 1 - Xz, respectively. The transitions out of s d to tied distributi have probabilities q,(t) = 7,(t) while those out of s* have proband TO Hed CISUTTOUTTONS abilities *q,(t) = *q,(t). The structure of the associated Mar5(s,L()) Do g(t’, by") kovoriginalsourceMarkovis completelysource anddeterminedby the tyingsby theassumedstructurefor obtain-of the *q,(t)as = Do6,L¢'))te S(t)De g(t", 7) - (8.4), ing more reliable parameter estimates. t t"E T(t’) 

BAHL et al.: CONTINUOUS SPEECH RECOGNITION 187 Note that q,(¢, 7) and *qg,(t, 7) do not depend directly on the : . 7 p(w / p;(w),Wo)) output data belonging to the jth block. Thus the data / in the jth block can be considered new in relation to these aA p(w / dolw),Wo)) probabilities. / co We now run the FB Algorithm on data 67’ to determine the ann X values based on n associated Markov sources which have q-8 (ws¢ bw wo) fixed distributions over transitions leaving the states s and s*. dq Pam LE SIMN2 These d values are obtained from estimates of probabilities of ‘\ p(w/¢qlwy .Wo)) transitions leaving the states $ of the associated Markov source [see Fig. 12(b)]. Only & counter pairs pertaining to the values Fig. 13. A section of the interpolated trigram language model cor\(i) and 1 - X(i) being estimated are established. When runresponding to the state determined by the word pair w,, w2. ning on the data of the jth block, the jth associated Markov source is used based on the probabilities q,(t, /) and *q,(t,j). are described in [15]. In particular, it is possible to have v difThe values A, used in the jth block are chosen by computing ferent tying partitions of the state space corresponding to the frequency estimates transition distributions g,(t), i= 1,---,v, and to obtain the volt, 6”) 8(s, L() . final estimates by the formula U8,1) = Sm7 (8.5) ~ v i) Dot’, 7") GO= DAU) as (8.9) t’ i=1 and setting X, = A() if q(s, 7) belonged to the ith frequency with ,(s) values determined by the Forward-Backward range. Also, the A, counts estimated from the jth block are Algorithm. then added to the contents of the 7th counter pair. : ; After We illustrate this deleted interpolation algorithm with an apusing A values have been computed, new test data is predicted plication to the trigram language model for the laser patent an associated Markov source based on probabilities text corpus used at IBM. Let m(w) be the syntactic part of speech (e.g., noun, verb, 5(s, L(t) > c(t, b”") etc.) assigned to the word w. Let ¢;,i=1,---,4 be functions Q(t) =,jm (8.6) classifying the language model states w, w2 as follows: D865,t L(')) Do e(t', bY) $1(wiW2)= {(w1Wa)} y=1 $2(W1W2) = {(ww2)|m(w) = n(w,)} n , W1W2) = {(ww’)|1(w)= a(w, ), 1(w')= 2(w *q (t) =—_fs* rr (8.7) ¢4(wW1W2) = {all pairs of words}. (8.10) x‘[565,][ Lt)] , "oe 2d c(t,”BY)m Let K(¢;(w;W2)) be the number of times that members of the ; set ¢;(w,W2) occur in the training text. Finally, partition the and Ag values chosen from the derived set X(1),---, A(k), deState space into sets pensending on the range° within which the estimate $5(W1W2)= {ww |K(Gj(ww'))' = K(j(w1W2))= 1 s, L(t cj, O41 ' F 56,LO) Delt, 67") eee” t j= K(9;(ww')) = K(¢;(wiw2)) = q(s) - (8.8) > 1} (8.11) > > c(t’, BT") which will be used to tie the associated states w;w, accordtj. ing to the frequency of word pair occurrence. Note that if K(¢,(w1W2)) = 2, then ¢5(w, W2) is simply the set of all word falls. It might appear that the convergence of the estimation pairs that occurred in the corpus exactly as many times as of the interpolation weights \(7) needs proving since it involves w,w, did. A different \ distribution will correspond to each the use of different fixed distributions q(s, /) over different different set (8.11). The language model transition probabiliblocks j= 1,---,n. However, some thought will reveal that ties are given by the formula the problem can be reformulated in terms of a single move complex Markov source, -some of whose parameters are- tied A 4 and others fixed. This source is identical to the trellis that is P(w3|wiW2) = D> Ai(os(wiW2)) P;(w3|9i(w1W2)). needed to carry out the A estimation. The process consists of =I carrying out the Forward-Backward Algorithms for estimating (8.12) the parameters of the complex Markov source, and thus converges by the Baum theorem [16]. Fig. 13 illustrates this graphically. We use deleted interpolaThis approach to modeling data generation is called deleted tion also in estimating the probabilities associated with the interpolation. Several variations are possible some of which acoustic channel model. 

188 

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. PAMI-5, NO. 2, MARCH 1983 

IX. A MEASURE OF DIFFICULTY FOR FINITE ering the sentences of the task to be strings of phonemes rather STATE RECOGNITION TASKS than strings of words. We can then compute the phoneme Research in continuous speech recognition has led to the delevel perplexity of the two tasks and normalize them to words velopment of a number of artificial tasks. In order to compare Of equal length. In this way the perplexity of the task with the performance of different systems on sentences from differthe greater average word length will be lowered relative to that ent tasks, it is necessary to have a measure of the intrinsic difof the other task. ficulty of a task. Although vocabulary size is almost always Some pairs of phonemes are more confusable than others. It mentioned in the description of an artificial task, by itself itis 'S possible therefore to have two tasks with the same phoneme practically useless as a measure of difficulty. In this section level perplexity, one of which is much easier to recognize than we describe perplexity, a measure of difficulty based on well the other, simply because its words are acoustically farther established information theoretic principles. The experimental apart. We can take this into account by considering the joint results described in the next section show a clear correlation probability distribution P(w, y) of word sequences W and between increasing perplexity and increasing error rate. acoustic sequencesy and determining from it the conditional Perplexity is defined in terms of the information theoretic entropy Hwly).y could be the output string from a particuconcept of entropy. The tasks used in speech recognition lar acoustic Processor OF simply the time waveform itself. Uncan be adequately modeled as unifilar? Markov sources. Let fortunately, this is far too difficult to compute in practice. P(w|s) be the probability that word w will be produced next Perplexity reflects the difficulty of recognition when a comwhen the current state is s. The entropy, H,(w) associated plete search can be performed. The effect on the error rate of with state s is performing an incomplete search may be more severe for one Hw) language than for another, even though they have the same =- > P(w|s) log, P(w|s). (9.1) perplexity. However, as the results in the next section show, w there is a clear correlation between perplexity and error rate. The entropy H(w) of the task is simply the average value of H,(w). Thus if 7(s) is the probability of being in state s during X. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS the production of a sentence, then The results given in this section, obtained before 1980, are H(w) described in detail in [3], [5], [6], [18], [19]. = » m(s) Hs(w). (9.2) Table I shows the effect of training set size of recognition s error rate. 200 sentences from the Raleigh Language (100 The perplexity S(w) of the task is given in terms of its entraining and 100 test) were recognized using a segmenting tropy H(w) by acoustic processor and a stack algorithm decoder. We initially S(w)w) **=** 2HW) . (9.3) estimated the acoustic: channel model parameters by examining samples of acoustic processor output. These parameter values Often, artificially constrained tasks specify the sentences were then refined by applying the Forward-Backward Algopossible without attaching probabilities to them. Although rithm to training sets of increasing size. While for small trainthe task perplexity depends on the probabilities assigned to ing set sizes performance on training sentences should be the sentences, Shannon [17] has shown that the maximum ensubstantially better than on test sentences, for sufficiently large tropy achievable for a task with V possible sentences of avertraining set sizes performance on training and text sentences age length / is 1/1 log, N. Hence the maximum perplexity is should be about equal. By this criterion a training set size of N¥"_ Tf all the sentences for the task could be arranged as a 600 sentences is adequate for determining the parameters of regular tree, the number of branches emanating from a node this acoustic channel model. Notice that even a training set would be N/". So, for artificially constrained tasks, perplexsize as small as 200 sentences leads to a substantial reduction ity can be thought of as the average number of alternative in error rate as compared to decoding with the initially estiwords at each point. For the Raleigh task of Fig.7,the nummated channel model parameters. ber of alternative words ranges from 1 to 24, and the perplexThe power of automatic training is evident from Table I in ity is 7.27. the dramatic decrease in error rate resulting from training even 

ber of alternative words ranges from 1 to 24, and the perplexThe power of automatic training is evident from Table I in ity is 7.27. the dramatic decrease in error rate resulting from training even For natural language tasks, some sentences are much more’ with a small amount of data. The results in Table II further probable than others and so the maximum perplexity is not demonstrate the power of automatic training. Here, three useful as a measure of difficulty. However, the perplexity, versions of the acoustic channel model are used, each weaker which can be computed from the probabilities of the sentences, than the previous one. The “‘complete acoustic channel model” remainsa useful measure. Information theory shows that fora result corresponds to the last line of Table I. The acoustic language with entropy H, we can ignore all but the most probchannel model in this case is built up from phonetic subsources able 2” strings of length J and still achieve any prescribed erand acoustic subsources as described in Section IV. The phoror rate. netic subsources produce many different strings for each word The definition of perplexity makes no use of the phonetic _ reflecting phonological modifications due to rate of articulation, character of the words in the vocabulary of the language. Two dialect, etc. The “‘single pronunciation” result is obtained with tasks may have the same perplexity but one may have words an acoustic channel model in which the phonetic subsources that are substantially longer than the other, thereby making allow only a single pronunciation for each word. Finally, the recognition easier. This problem can be overcome by consid“spelling-based pronunciation” result is obtained with an 

BAHL et al.: CONTINUOUS SPEECH RECOGNITION 

189 

TABLE I EFFECT OF TRAINING SET SIZE ON ERROR RATE 

|||%|of Sentences|
|---|---|---|---|
|||Decoded Incorrectly||
|Training|Set|———_—||
|Size||Test|Training|
|0||80%|-|
|200||23%|12%|
|400||20%|13%|
|600||15%|16%|
|800||18%|16%|
|1070||17%|14%|



**==> picture [472 x 104] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
TABLE III .<br>TABLE Il DECODING RESULTS FOR SEVERAL DIFFERENT ACOUSTIC<br>EFFECT OF WEAK ACOUSTICS CHANNEL MODELS PROCESSORS WITH THE RALEIGH LANGUAGE<br>% of Sentences . Error Rate<br>Modeldel T:Type Dscoded Incorrectly Acoustic Processor; OOSentence Word<br>Complete Acoustic Channel Model 17% TT<br>Single Pronounciation 25% MAP. 27% 3.6%<br>Spelling-Based Pronounciation 57% CSAP 2% 0.2%<br>—_—— TRIVIAL 2% 0.2%<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


TABLE IV RECOGNITION RESULTS FOR SEVERAL TASKS OF VARYING PERPLEXITY 

||Vocabulary|||Word|ErrorRate|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Task|Size|Perplexity|Segmenting|AP|Time-Synchronous AP|
|CMU-AIX05|1011|4.53|0.8%||0.1%|
|Raleigh<br>Laser|250<br>1000|7.27<br>24.13|3.1%<br>33.1%||0.6%<br>8.9%|



acoustic channel model in which the single pronunciation processor on three tasks of varying perplexity. The Raleigh allowed by the phonetic subsources is based directly on the task has been described earlier in the paper. The Laser task is letter-by-letter spelling of the word. This leads to absurd a natural language task used at IBM. It consists of sentences pronunciation models for some of the words. For example, from the text of patents in laser technology. To limit the through is modeled as if the final g and A were pronounced. vocabulary, only. sentences made entirely from the 1000 most The trained parameters for the acoustic channel with spellingfrequent words in the complete laser corpus are considered. based pronunciations show that letters are often deleted by The CMU-AIX05 task [20] is the task used by Carnegie-Mellon the acoustic processor reflecting the large number of silent University in their Speech Understanding System to meet the letters in English spelling. Although the results obtained in ARPA specifications [21]. All these results were obtained this way are much worse than those obtained with the other with sentences spoken by a single talker in a sound-treated two channel models, they are still considerably better than room. Approximately 1000 sentences were used for estimating the results obtained with the complete channel model using the parameters of the acoustic channel model in each of the parameters estimated by people. experiments. There is a clear correlation between perplexity Table III shows results on the Raleigh Language for several and error rate. The CMU-AIX05 task has the largest vocabudifferent acoustic processors. In each case the same set of lary but the smallest perplexity. Note that for each of the 100 sentences was decoded using the stack decodingalgorithm. tasks, the performance of the time-synchronous acoustic MAP is a segmenting acoustic processor, while CSAP and processor is considerably better than that of the segmenting TRIVIAL are nonsegmenting acoustic processors. Prototypes acoustic processor. 

Table III shows results on the Raleigh Language for several different acoustic processors. In each case the same set of 100 sentences was decoded using the stack decodingalgorithm. MAP is a segmenting acoustic processor, while CSAP and TRIVIAL are nonsegmenting acoustic processors. Prototypes for CSAP were selected by hand from an examination of speech data. Those for TRIVIAL were obtained automatically from a Viterbi alignment of about one hour of speech data. Table IV summarizes the performance of the stack decoding algorithm with a segmenting and a time-synchronous acoustic 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT We would like to acknowledge the contributions of the following present and past members of the Continuous Speech Recognition Group at the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research 

190 

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. PAMI-5, NO. 2, MARCH 1983 

- Center: J. K. Baker, J. M. Baker, R. Bakis,P. Cohen, A.Cole, [20] D. R. Reddy et al., “Speech understanding systems final report,” R. Dixon,: B. Lewis,: E. Muckstein,A and H. Silverman.: [21] Dep.A. Newell,Comput.J. Sci.,Barnett,Carnegie-MellonJ. W. Forgie,Univ.,C. Green,1977.D. Klatt, J. C. R. REFERENCES Licklider, J. Munson, D. R. Reddy, and W. A. Woods, Speech Understanding Systems: Final Report of a Study Group. Am- 

- [1] R. Bakis, “Continuous speech recognition via centisecond acoustic sterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland, 1973. states,” presented at the 91st Meeting Acoust. Soc. Amer., Washington, DC, Apr. 1976; also IBM Res. Rep. RC-5971, IBM Res. Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, Apr. 1976. 

- [2] B. T. Lowerre, “The Harpy speech recognition system,” Ph.D. ggg: . Ke aE ‘ dissertation, Dep. Comput. Sci., Carnegie-Mellon Univ., Pitts- 4 — com ae from ie vadiee Institutent 

- [3] burgh, PA, 1976. 3] ~Cs Technology, Kharagpur, India, in 1964 and the L. R. Bahl, R. Bakis, P. S. Cohen, A. G. Cole, F. Jelinek, B. L. | —Sséi( et OMSS«. and Ph.D. deerees in electrical engineerLewis, and R. L. Mercer, “Recognition results with several acousa6, gum QM University of Illinois, Urbana tic processors,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal a 2 8 Pime 966 and 1968, respectively , , 

- [4] Processing, Washington, DC, Apr. 1979, pp. 249-251. in | ye Since 1968 he has been at the IBM Thomas J J. M. Baker, “Performance statistics of the hear acoustic proces- © * ‘Watson: Research Center in Yorktown Heishts, sor,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal Processing, | NY. Since 1979 he has been Manager of the 

- [5] Washington,L. R. Bahl, J.DC,K.Apr.Baker,1979,P. pp.S. Cohen,262-265.N. R. Dixon,. F. Jelinek,. _«ee  ~=~—sONatural7 Language Speech Recognition: Group.Z R. L. Mercer, and H. F. Silverman, ‘Preliminary results on the During 1969-1974 he was also Adjunct Assoctecformance of - stem for the automatic recoenition of con ate Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer 

- Sauce speech.” in Pn IBEE Int. Conf, Acoust . i. Sonat Science, Columbia University, New York, NY. His research interests 

- [6] ProceL. R.asBa **h** l,e PhiladelJ. K. Baker,phia, PP.A,S. res Cohen, 1976A **.** pp.425-429.G. Cole, F. Jelinek,» B.Olena’L, CO™™municationinclude speech enonetheory. information theory, coding theory, and Lewis, and R. L. Mercer, ‘“‘Automatic recognition of continuously spoken sentences froma finite state grammar,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal Processing, Tulsa, OK, Apr. 1978, pp. 418-421. 

- [7] oo a Frederick Jelinek _(S’55-M’62-SM’69-F’74) J. Lyons, Introduction to Theoretical Linguistics. Cambridge, _ ..*“ was born in Prague, Czechoslovakia, on Novem- 

- [8] England: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1969. **f** | ber 18, 1932. He received the S.B., S.M., and P. S. Cohen and R. L. Mercer, “The phonological component of - oh Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the an automatic speech-recognition system,” in Speech Recognition, Waging wh Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cam- 

- [9] J.D. K.R. Baker,Reddy,“TheEd. DRAGONNew York:system—AnAcademic, overview,”1975, pp. 275-320. JEEE Trans. a—\S7© : bridge,Since inJune 1956,19721958,he andhas 1962,been respectively.with the ComAcoust., Speech, Signal Processing, vol. ASSP-23, pp. 24-29, gf oo , puter Sciences Department, IBM Thomas J. 

- [10] R.Feb.E. 1975.Bellman, Dynamic. Programming.. Princeton,. NJ: Princeton. vy| a_ WatsonNY, whereResearchhe managesCenter,researchYorktownon automaticHeights, Univ. Press, 1957. Loa. . 

- [11] — recognition (transcription) of speech. He has G. D. Forney, Jr., “The Viterbi algorithm,” Proc. IEEE, vol.61, heen an Instructor at M.L.T. (1959-1962), a Visiting Lecturer at Harvard 

- [12] PP. 268-278, Mar. 1973. . . . ,, University (1962), a Professor of Electrical Engineering at Cornell F. Jelinek, ‘‘A fast sequential decoding algorithm using a stack, University (1962-1974), a Visiting Scientist at M.I.T. Lincoln Labora- 

- [13] IBM J. Res. Develop., vol. 13, pp. 675-685, Nov. 1969. tory (1964-1965), and a Visiting Scientist at IBM Thomas J. Watson N. J. Nilsson, Problem-Solving Methods in Artificial Intelligence. Research Center (1968-1969). His principal interests are in speech 

- {14] New York: McGraw-Hill, 1971. a, . recognition and information theory. His is the author of Probabilistic L. R. Bahl and F. J elinek, Decoding for channels with insertions, Information Theory (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1968). deletions, and substitutions with applications to speech recogniDr. Jelinek was the President of the IEEE Group on Information tion,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-21, pp. 404-411, Theory in 1977 and was the recipient of the 1969-1970 Information 

- {15] JulyF. Jelinek1975. and R. L. Mercer, “Interpolated estimationae of Markov Theory Group Prize Paper Award. source parameters from sparse data,” in Proc. Workshop Pattern Recognition in Practice, May 21-23, 1980. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland. 

- [16] L. E. Baum, “An inequality and associated maximization tech— _. = Robert L. Mercer was born in San Jose, CA, on nique in statistical estimation of probabilistic functionsof Markov gg » July 11, 1946. He received the B.S. degree in 

- [17] C.processes,”E. Shannon, Inequalities,“Prediction vol. and3, pp.entropy1-8, 1972.of printed English,” Bell -88 ==$= == _~—~—| = = ._ physicsNew Mexico, and mathematicsAlbuquerque, from thein 1968 Universityand theof [18] Syst.L. R. Tech.Bahl, J.,J. K.vol.Baker, 30, pp.P. 50-64,S. Cohen, 1951.F. Jelinek, B. L. Lewis,and _.=| ..== * | **~** _ ~— fromM.S. theand UniversityPh.D. degreesof Illinois,in computerUrbana, inscience1970 R. L. Mercer, “Recognition of a continuously read natural cori, _-~- 2 __ and 1972, respectively. pus,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal Processing, =§ = Since 1972 he has been a Research Staff Tulsa, OK, Apr. 1978, pp. 422-424. _ member, Computer Sciences Department, and 

- [19] L. R. Bahl, R. Bakis, P. S. Cohen, A. G. Cole, F. Jelinek, B.L. = is currently Manager of Real-Time Speech Lewis, and R. L. Mercer, ‘‘Further results on the recognition of Recognition at the IBM Thomas J. Watson Rea continuously read natural corpus,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. search Center, Yorktown Heights, NY. Acoust., Speech, Signal Processing, Denver, CO, Apr. 1980, pp. Dr. Mercer is a member of Sigma Xi, Phi Beta Kappa, and Phi Kappa 872-875. Phi. 

